# Identity & Security

RISE uses crytographic hash functions and ellyptical curve cryptography to
secure the network and validate the authenticity of transactions and blocks.
Specifically, the RISE protocol
uses [EdDSA](https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc8032) for key-pairs and signatures, as
well as [SHA-256](https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc4634) as a secure hashing
function.

## Key Pairs

A key pair is made up of a Public and a Private key in conjunction. A key pair
allows for asymmetric cryptography. Specifically, this means, a key pair can
perform two important functions:

* A message can be encrypted using a Public Key and then decrypted using
  a Private Key
* A message can be signed using a Private Key and then verified using a Public
  Key

To generate the key pair, the following procedure is taken. First a passphrase
is generated using
a [BIP39](https://github.com/bitcoin/bips/blob/master/bip-0039.mediawiki) mnemonic
passphrase generation algorithm. The goal of the mnemonic is to
memorable and easy to store without error and so consists of a series of short
words which the user can store securely. After the passphrase is generated and
stored by the user, a seed can be generated by taking a SHA-256 hash of the
passphrase. This seed is used as an input to
an [Ed25519](https://ed25519.cr.yp.to/) cryptographic function to generate a
Public / Private key pair.

Private keys can then be used to sign transactions and broadcast to the
network. Because the corresponding public key is also included in the
transaction, the verifier can be certain that the creator of the transaction
owns the associated private key, thereby verifying its authenticity. More
information about how this is done can be found in [link
href="pages/protocol/Transactions"]Transactions [/link]

## Accounts

Accounts are key-pair holders. Once a key-pair has been generated, the key-pair
holder can receive RISE tokens sent to his or her account using his or her
AccountID derived for the Public Key as described below. Using the Private Key,
new transactions from the account can then be authored to send RISE tokens to
other accounts or perform special functions like voting as described in [link
href="pages/protocol/Transactions"]Transactions[/link]. A JSON representation of
an account is as follows.

```json
{
    "address": RISE AccountID,
    "unconfirmedBalance": Balance after Transactions unconfirmed by the network,
    "balance": Balance after Transactions confirmed by the network,
    "publicKey": Public Key,
    "unconfirmedSignature": Has unconfirmed Second Signature,
    "secondSignature": Has Second Signature,
    "secondPublicKey": Second Public Key associated to Second Signature,
    "multisignatures": Multisignatures,
    "u_multisignatures": unconfirmed Multisignatures
}
```

### AccountIDs

A RISE AccountID (also sometimes referred to as Wallet Address), is a short
identifier used as a reference to an account when sending transactions. To
generate the AccountID, first a hash of the Public Key is generating using
a SHA-256 hashing algorithm. The first 8 bytes of the hash are then taken and
reversed. The resulting numerical representation with an `R` appended is used
as an AccountID. An example AccountID looks like the following
`8093718274007724701R`.

### Second Key Pair

Accounts have the option to generate a Second Key Pair using the same [Key Pair
Generation Algorithm](#key-pair) described above. This allows the user to have
an added layer of security by requiring two signatures for every authored
transaction which can prevent forgery in the case that one Private Key or
Passphrase is stolen. After the account registers the Second Public Key using
a Second Signature Transaction, every subsequent Transaction must use both
Private Keys to sign the Transaction.

### Multisignature Accounts

Accounts can also register as multisignature accounts for increased security,
using a Multisignature Registration Transaction. This allows the account to
provide a list of possible `n` identities (as a list of Public Keys) to sign
a transaction and a minimum number `m` of signatures required. In a given
amount of time after the timestamp of the transaction (the lifespan of the
multisignature account), at least `m` of the `n` Private Keys associated to the
Public Keys must sign the transaction for it to be verified.
